# Data-Activism-in-Europe-Thesis-Project

This is a README file for this repository of the Thesis project _Unravelling Resistance in the age of the Data Revolution. 

This Repository contains a notebook in which a webscraper is built to collect newsletters of the European Digital Rights Initiative (EDRi). These newsletters are analyzed using the webtool Voyant. The Repository contains the dataset. Moreover, in this file a list of all the interactive visualizations can be found with links that redirect you to the Voyant tool in which the visualizations can be viewed. 

Voyant Dashboard: https://voyant-tools.org/?corpus=c54bf69e97d4310d6d0efbbb8120e7cc

The Corpus: https://voyant-tools.org/?corpus=c54bf69e97d4310d6d0efbbb8120e7cc&skipToDocId=886b00726f32b67b42acd41bad02e409&view=Reader

Thesis Abstract: 

This Thesis makes the argument that forms of data agency can be found within the framework of Data Colonialism when considering a context-specific approach that foregrounds resistance practices and civic engagement in the processes of datafication. In doing so, the Thesis challenges the universalistic and deterministic claims of Data Colonialism, which posit that the agency of the user is eroded in a capitalist-driven system where everyday life is commodified for profit, transforming individuals into data subjects under a new stage of capitalism. When addressing the data-centric regime from a perspective that considers its growing complexity, dynamism and the relevance of situated contexts, different forms of Data Colonialism can be identified. This can unveil the power relations that reinforce oppression through data assemblages and local forms of opposition. For this reason, this Thesis explores how data activist practices emerge and mobilize within the Data Revolution in Europe through a case-study focused on the European Digital Rights Initiative (EDRi). This Thesis combines distant and close reading methods to analyze the newsletters of the EDRi. Trends and patterns of the EDRi’s discourse of mobilization are identified with a variety of text mining tools. Additionally, these trends and patterns are traced back in their past with a detailed and contextual evaluation of a few of the EDRi’s earlier publications. Throughout the analysis, the results are laid against a complex constructed context that illustrates how datafication folds out in Europe in relation to civil society. This suggests that overtime, the EDRi constructs a framework to resist the power inequalities imposed by the ever-evolving information society. Hence, the trends and patterns of the current discourse of the EDRi reflect how the EDRi protects privacy, battles surveillance practices and calls up for justice under the overarching goal of protecting and advancing digital rights in Europe. This framework is rooted in a region with a strong interdependence to the global market, historical-rooted values such as individual rights, freedoms and democracy with a civil society that searches for relevance and societal transformation while advocating, lobbying and campaigning for these values. These local expressions of datafication translate into various regulations in Europe such as the GDPR which do, however, still fall short in the eyes of data activist organizations such as the EDRi. Through the examination of the emergence and mobilization of the EDRi, the Thesis demonstrates how the EDRi challenges the dominant data epistemologies through civic action, seeking to increase individuals’ control over their personal data and access, in line with the preservation of European cultural and historical values. This reflects how the EDRi contributed to a ‘novel epistemic culture’ of data activism which foregrounds various layers of data agency to resist the colonization of the self as it occurs in Europe.
